---
question: A1
title: What is the difference between the conventional proofing process and using a trusted referee at IAL2?
---
We recognize that the language in the document is somewhat confusing. In our attempt to use standards-based terms like SHALL and SHOULD, avoiding terms like “unless” and “if,” this section got a little bloated. The requirement, in layman’s terms, is that agencies should make every effort to proof individuals according to the [conventional proofing process](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63a.html#normal) laid out in Section 4.4.1 of SP 800-63A. However, we know there are scenarios where the conventional proofing process, either remote or in person, is not going to work for all constituents. In other words, some individuals will just not be able to pass the conventional process or even have the identity evidence required by the conventional process. Nonetheless, we don’t want this to be a barrier for, say, a homeless veteran with no, or a lack of, documentation. This is why we added the ability to use “[trusted referees](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63a.html#referee),” such as notaries, that can assist agencies in establishing a digital identity for the applicant. This gives agencies greater flexibility to determine what works best for their stakeholders and their risk tolerance. Ultimately the agency needs to define a process, but there is a catch or two. First, trusted referees can be used to achieve IAL2, but not IAL3. Second, as an individual builds, or rebuilds, evidence of their identity, we want agencies to regularly attempt to re-proof any individual who has completed the trusted referee process via the conventional process.