---
question: 3
title: When does SP 800-63 apply to federal agencies?
---
Agencies make the risk determinations for their systems so we don’t set those rules. That said, OMB offers some good information in OMB Circular A-130, stating that legacy systems, specifically those in production on or before June 22, 2017, have 12 months to comply with a new publication, while systems currently in development or undergoing a major transformation need to use the current revision when deployed. For completeness, the language from [OMB Circular A-130](https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/omb/assets/OMB/circulars/a130/a130revised.pdf) states (emphasis ours):

> “**For legacy information systems**, agencies are expected to meet the requirements of, and be in compliance with, NIST standards and guidelines **within one year** of their respective publication dates unless otherwise directed by OMB. The one-year compliance date for revisions to NIST publications applies only to new or updated material in the publications. **For information systems under development or for legacy systems undergoing significant changes**, agencies are expected to meet the requirements of, and be in compliance with, NIST standards and guidelines **immediately upon deployment** of the systems.”

Importantly, we’re not just finalizing SP 800-63 and throwing it over the wall. We’re here to help agencies get it right all the way into production. As needs are identified, we will consider additional resources to support agency implementations. These resources will not contain additional normative requirements, but will instead provide further discussion, technology-specific examples, and details to support implementation of the guidelines. As agencies implement SP 800-63 for their specific use cases, we plan to be available to answer questions, provide clarifications regarding the guidelines, and apply any implementation-specific lessons learned to future revisions.
