---
question: 1
title: Why were identity proofing, authentication, and federation separated into distinct categories?
---
As the market has matured, so has our guidance. Based on feedback from industry, and in consultation and collaboration with the White House Office of Management and Budget (OMB), we concluded that separating these three items is much more in line with how digital identity gets done in the marketplace. Individual assurance levels that can be mixed and matched provide agencies with opportunities for greater flexibility, more user convenience, enhanced privacy, and reduced risk. No brainer, right?

Instead of a single assurance level for identity proofing, authenticators, and federations, agencies can combine each element based on their risk tolerance, user populations, and the desired outcomes of the digital services they are offering. SP 800-63-3 includes a set of “choose your own adventure” [flowcharts](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63-3.html#sec6) to facilitate the process of selecting the appropriate identity proofing, authenticator, or federation assurance levels – also known as “xALs.” With these flowcharts, organizations perform a risk assessment, answer a set of functional questions, and, based on their responses, identify the most appropriate xAL for their system and users.

This flexibility also asks agencies to think innovatively about their system’s privacy requirements. This includes pseudonymous interactions even when strong, multi-factor authenticators are used. In a nutshell, the new version gives agencies the flexibility to deploy strong authentication while avoiding unnecessary proofing of users’ identities that would require collecting (and then protecting) sensitive information. This was not possible in previous versions of the document, where proofing and authentication requirements were bound together in a single assurance level. The new guidelines also require federated identity providers (IdPs) to support a range of options for querying data, like using attribute references (e.g., asserting whether an individual is older than a certain age as opposed to sharing the entire date of birth).
