---
question: B9
title: Why are the timeout requirements so short for AAL2 and AAL3?
---
The reauthentication requirements session timeouts in 800-63B sections [4.1.3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63b.html#aal1reauth), [4.2.3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63b.html#aal2reauth), and [4.3.3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63b.html#aal3reauth) are intended to mitigate situations where a user’s device is left logged in but unattended, such as if the user walks away from a terminal. As AAL2 and AAL3 are intended to protect sensitive and potentially harmful data access, sessions at these levels have to be protected strongly. The timeout values are based on both past versions of 800-63 as well as common industry practices for accessing sensitive information.

There are other means of ensuring that the device is not used by a separate party, such as locking the device at the OS level and requiring local authentication for the subscriber to unlock. However, it is often difficult for a remote RP (relying party) to know the state of the subscriber’s device at runtime. In these cases, the session timeouts act as a reasonable control. If instead the RP knows that, for instance, the subscriber is using a managed system that requires screen lock by a system policy, the documented Digital Identity Acceptance Statement for the RP (see [800-63-3 section 5.5](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63-3.html#daps)) can state that the risks addressed by short sessions are compensated for by other factors, and the RP can relax its session timeouts for such devices. Alternatively, an RP could manage most of the subscriber’s interactions at a lower AAL and switch to a higher AAL for sensitive operations. In these cases, the lesser-privileged session would be allowed to last much longer than the privilege escalation. Adopting these kinds of compensating controls are part of the RP’s risk assessment process and a matter of local policy.

[Section 5.4 of 800-63-3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63-3.html#risk) discusses the application of compensating controls and the assessment of risk in greater detail.